we begin with breaking news from Rafa
the Israeli military has ordered all
residents and displaced people to leave
the Eastern neighborhoods of gaza's
Southernmost city it says they must move
to the alasi area near the coastline
that's ahead of what it says will be the
use of extreme force in the eastern part
of the city more than 1 and a half
million Palestinians have been
Sheltering in Rafa after the Israeli
military forced them out of Northern and
Central Gaza we are joined Now by our
correspondent hany mmud he's live for us
in Rafa firstly hany tell us about this
evacuation order and how it's been
conveyed to people
there yes well as of this hour we're
seeing a scores of people people have
counted by the tens right now entire
families have been Sheltering inside
residential homes in the eastern part of
RA City that includes the Salam
neighborhood the Jan district and the
surrounding uh areas of these two
neighborhoods are start have started
moving out of the area taking their
stuff and uh their belongings and moving
to toward the western part of the city
when when when ask where they are going
they're still not sure where to head
there's a lot of uncertainty uh going on
there really military after a terrible
night quite Restless is Sleepless almost
11 Air Raids across the eastern part the
central uh of raak City killing at least
20 people mostly women and children
right now those people who were inside
their residential homes they were bombed
there the difficulties right now faced
by any challenges faced by the uh the
civil defense crew on the ground up till
hour it's been more than 8 hours right
now they're still working on getting
people from under the rubbles in the
areas that were bombed uh and overnight
the attacks across the city there really
military as early hour this morning it
dropped leaflet uh and made phone
calls sharply order ing people to
evacuate the eastern part of RAF City
and to start heading toward the
evacuation zones in western part of the
city in Al maasi as well as to the
western part and the central part of
Khan Unice that's the the evacuation
Zone that's been designated by the
Israeli military as well as now Moi
evacuation zone or evacuation Zone in
general designated by Israeli military
stretch from d City at the western part
passing it through kanun all the way to
ra City the western part of the city all
the way to the Egyptian uh Gaza border
now this particular evacuation zone or
sliver land at the western part of the
the STP from the Central Area kanun
hasn't been absolutely a a safe there
were attacks there were was repeatedly
attacked by either the artillery
Shilling as well as by the air strikes
at the time when kanun was was invaded
by the is really military people were
killed inside the tents that they set up
and in the areas they were told to
evacuate uh to right now there's a state
of chaos going on there's a state of
panic people did not expect it to happen
rapidly this way chaos and P Panic
you're saying Hanny just so soon after
people in Rafa were really hopeful that
there could be a ceasefire before those
negotiations ended and not only as
you've mentioned we've seen the Israelis
repeatedly attack maasi since they
designated this area a safe Zone we know
the condition that KH yunas one of
gaza's largest cities was left in after
the Israeli forces withdrew from there
so the options now while the Israelis
are telling people to
evacuate really I mean the options for
them for where to go that safe it
doesn't sound like there are any
absolutely I mean there is it has been
improving largely for the past seven
months uh right now there is no single
safety place across ra City and just to
give you an example of how this
evacuation orders have been largely as
people describe it with a frustration
contradictory vague and and misleading
for the most part we have documented
cases of people arriving to evacuation
zones and within hours within days of
their arrival they were bombed and
killed inside the very areas they were
told to evacuate to in order to avoid
being bombed uh in the northern part of
Gaza City and more recently in the city
of KH units now that has created a sense
of mistrust in the narrative about
evacuation Zone and led people into a
conclusion that you can't create a safe
Zone in in a war zone pretty much we
look at an entire Gaza Strip being
equally bombed with more of it within
the past uh few weeks concentrated in ra
City and the central area now the
central area uh we've seen attacks
constant attack repeat attacks on
refugee camps the central part of the
central area which makes it less safe
right now for people people are heading
toward these areas but they're knowing
they're walking with a shattered sense
of safety and the the the the the
feeling that they have it it could
they're going to die here they're going
to die in the evacuation Zone everything
everywhere is risky everywhere there is
no safety whatsoever honey thank you
very much for that for now that is our
correspondent honey mm live in Gaza with
the latest on the situation there after
the Israeli military has ordered people
in Rafa to
evacuate sah had the spokesperson for
Norwegian Refugee Council and she's
joining us live from Aman thank you very
much for your time firstly just how
problematic is it for Israel to tell
people to evacuate to an area that it's
attacked a number of
times it's completely problematic it's
inhumane uh and unsafe uh because the
elmasi area where people are being
ordered to evacuate to uh is not
equipped to accommodate and host more
idps uh the area itself already uh hosts
hundreds of thousands of Palestinian
idps uh it does not have enough uh
humanitarian assistance and services to
support additional uh displaced
population
uh and also if Israel is going to order
people to move towards theunis area well
that's completely been destroyed uh
throughout the Israeli bombardment over
the past period uh so these areas uh
that are being ordered for evacuation
are not safe uh they cannot uh
accommodate further displaced people uh
and people right now feel as though they
have nowhere to go to seek safety uh
this evacuation order right now is the
start of uh a nightmare scenario for
people uh in RAF uh who have been
terrified for months now over what is to
to come and and as Aid agencies we're
also terrified about the coming period
because if a ra offensive takes place um
in full force that would lead to the
collapse of the aid response that is
really reliant on the Raa Hub to uh
distribute Aid to organize Aid
throughout that area yeah you say a
night a nightmare situation for people
in Rafa who will tell you that the last
seven months they have been living
through a nightmare already you say that
there are already hundreds of thousands
of people in masasi refugee camp can you
tell us about the conditions that
they're facing and from what we know
about the conditions there can it take
thousands if not hundreds of thousands
more
people the conditions are woefully
inadequate uh there are not enough
humanitarian uh assistance and and
services being uh given to the
population there it does not have the
basic infrastructure in place to uh
service and support the current
displaced population there let alone an
additional um group of people moving
towards there and these are evacuation
orders have come really rapidly as well
so they're not giving enough time to the
humanitarian sector and Aid agencies to
support uh and ramp up aid aid at the
moment that's coming through into Gaza
is inadequate it's insufficient yeah um
to support the current population that
are displaced it cannot cannot support
another wave of displacement we are
talking about over 1 million people in
RAF uh who now have to face further
displacement but also death because
we've been warning that a military
offensive in would cause Mass atrocities
it would C cause Mass civilian deaths
and we've been urging the International
Community and allies of the Israeli
government to put a stop to this right
now we need every Ally of the Israeli
government including the US government
to increase its pressure stop the armed
sales uh put pressure on Israel to put a
stop to this offensive which would lead
to less atrocities and organizations
such as yourself had been urging Israel
since the start of the war on Gaza to
open the Karam Abu salm Crossing and
with the onset of famine in Northern
Gaza many Aid organizations had said it
is completely unavoidable famine in all
of Gaza is unavoidable unless kadam Abu
salum is fully functioning again Israel
has closed kadam Abu Salam not long
after opening it because of the attack
on Israeli soldiers in which something
like three Israeli soldiers were killed
what impact is that going to have now on
the humanitarian situation in
Gaza well closing any further Crossings
right now would just lead to to
catastrophic humanitarian conditions uh
people are already suffering from the in
the significantly ins inadequate Aid
that's coming through uh into Gaza and a
r offensive on top of this would
actually lead to the closure of the ra
Crossing which is really really
necessary right now to get in the
supplies to support the displaced
population in southern Gaza but also
across Gaza as well so we need um all
Crossings to be opened urgently um we
need humanitarian Aid commercial uh
supplies and goods to to enter Gaza as
well because of the famine that's
underway in Northern Gaza but our fear
is now that famine could spread to
Southern Gaza with this military
offensive because of the cut to Aid that
we'll see over the coming period this is
why we are pleading and urging with the
International Community to put an end to
this military offensive otherwise Gaza
will face its deadliest chapter moving
forward where people will die not only
from the bombardment but from inadequate
aid from
dehydration and and starv
which is of course something that we are
already seeing very much happening over
the last few months that is the
Norwegian Refugee council's s joining us
live from Aman thank you very much for
your time on this today we really
appreciate
it thank
you well let's stay with this we are now
joined by the anra spokesperson that is
of course the United Nations relief and
works agency Jonathan Fowler he's live
in occupied East Jerusalem thank you for
your time firstly your reaction to this
Israeli evacuation order telling people
in the east of Rafa to
leave well as the the previous um
speaker from the norian refu refugee
Council put it uh I mean we we're in in
a situation where any large scale
offensive from Israeli forces in Rafa is
simply going to mean more suffering and
death um the consequences would be
devastating the population in Rafa is
1.4 million that's about six times the
pre-war population half of that is uh a
children um and most of these people
have been displaced many times already
so we're simply not in a situation where
it's possible for people to continue in
these repeat waves of displacement
evacuation um the the the challenges are
just insurmountable at this stage and
there is just so many problems and
challenges aren't there I mean we've
spoken with our correspondent and with
the Norwegian Refugee Council about just
how incredibly problematic it is to ask
people to move to masasi given the lack
of facilities given it already so
overcrowded given it's been attacked
multiple times but if you look at the
areas of canun that people are now
looking at going to to try and escape
this Israeli offensive we know that
after the Israeli forces withdrew from
can Yunis after after weeks of fighting
the not only the state that can yunas is
in but the United Nations has said that
there is many unexploded ordinances in
canun for
example absolutely I mean for anybody to
return to an area area um I mean this
this is the same in in any war zone
around the world in in the wake of
fighting in any area you simply cannot
have people returning to to to zones of
combat um precisely for that reason
unexploded ordinance has to be cleared
before people are able to to return and
live in safety otherwise all that's
happening is you're pushing people back
into a Zone where their lives are at
risk from the the remnants of the the
previous fighting in that area so again
how is this how is this being allowed to
happen Mr fer how is Israel being
allowed to order people to evacuate to
places it's attacked to evacuate to
people where there are unexploded
ordinance we again we were hearing from
the Norwegian Refugee Council they were
saying how they're pleading with all
countries including the United States
who have leverage with Israel not to do
this I wonder what's your experience of
speaking to these countries of speaking
to Israel about their
plans well we we constantly Advocate
with all parties um to this conflict and
indeed across the International
Community for a ceasefire and that has
to be the bottom line I mean whether you
the question of why things are allowed
to happen is is another issue but the
thing is these things have to stop the
nowhere is safe in the Gaza Strip people
have been constantly displaced over and
over um even contingency plans are off a
little Solace I mean the the Grim
reality is that when you're moving
people around when people have to flee
there's no way that people can be
adequately prepared for the potential
consequences so the The Fallout from
such an offensive would be simply
catastrophic and it cannot happen Mr F
thank you so much for your time on this
that is the United Nations relief and
works agency uh spokesperson Jonathan
Fowler live in occupied East
Jerusalem make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get latest news from Al jaaz